Chapter 28: Structure and Function of the Hematologic System 



 

MULTIPLE CHOICE 

 

What is the most abundant class of plasma protein? 

Globulin 	c. Clotting factors 

Albumin 	d. Complement proteins 

ANS: B 

Albumin (approximately 60% of total plasma protein at a concentration of about 4 g/dl) is the most abundant plasma protein. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 946 

 

What is the effect of low plasma albumin? 

Clotting factors decrease, thus increasing the chance of prolonged bleeding. 

Fewer immunoglobulins are synthesized, thus impairing the immune function. 

Less iron is stored, thus increasing the incidence of iron deficiency anemia. 

Osmotic pressure decreases, thus water moves from the capillaries to the interstitium. 

ANS: D 

In the case of decreased production (e.g., cirrhosis, other diffuse liver diseases, protein malnutrition) or excessive loss of albumin (e.g., certain kidney diseases, extensive burns), the reduced oncotic pressure leads to excessive movement of fluid and solutes into the tissues and decreased blood volume. The other options are not accurate descriptions of the effect of low plasma albumin. 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 946 

 

What is the life span of an erythrocyte (in days)? 

20 to 30 	c. 100 to 120 

60 to 90 	d.   200 to 240 

ANS: C 

Because it cannot undergo mitotic division, the erythrocyte has a limited life span of approximately 120 days. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Pages 947-948 

 

Which statement concerning erythrocytes is true? 

Erythrocytes contain a nucleus, mitochondria, and ribosomes. 

Erythrocytes synthesize proteins. 

Erythrocytes have the ability to change shape to squeeze through microcirculation. 

Erythrocyte colony-stimulating factor (E-CSF) stimulates erythrocytes. 

ANS: C 

Reversible deformity enables the erythrocyte to assume a more compact torpedo-like shape, squeeze through the microcirculation, and return to normal. The other options are not accurate statements about erythrocytes. 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 948 

 

Granulocytes that contain granules of vasoactive amines, such as histamine, are called: 

Neutrophils 	c. Monocytes 

Eosinophils 	d. Basophils 

ANS: D 

Basophils contain cytoplasmic granules that hold an abundant mixture of biochemical mediators, including histamine, chemotactic factors, proteolytic enzymes, and an anticoagulant (heparin) (see Figure 27-3, C). This is not an accurate description of any of the other options. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 949 

 

Which of the following are formed elements of the blood that are not cells but are disk-shaped cytoplasmic fragments essential for blood clotting? 

Monocytes 	c. Macrophages 

Platelets 	d. Erythrocytes 

ANS: B 

Platelets (thrombocytes) are not true cells but are disk-shaped cytoplasmic fragments that are essential for blood coagulation and control of bleeding. This description is not accurate for any of the other options. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Pages 950-951 

 

Blood cells that differentiate into macrophages are known as: 

Monocytes 	                c..Eosinophils 

Neutrophils 	d. Basophils 

ANS: A 

Only monocytes migrate into a variety of tissues and fully mature into tissue macrophages and myeloid dendritic cells (see Table 27-3). 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 950 

 

Without prior exposure to an antigen, which cells are able to destroy some types of tumor cells and some virus-infected cells? 

Lymphocytes 	c. Megakaryocytes 

Plasma cells 	d. Natural killer (NK) cells 

ANS: D 

NK cells, which resemble large granular lymphocytes, kill some types of tumor cells (in vitro) and some virus-infected cells without being induced by previous exposure to these antigens. This capability is not true of the other options. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 950 

 

What is the life span of platelets (in days)? 

10 	c. 90 

30 	d.   120 

ANS: A 

A platelet circulates for approximately 10 days and ages. Macrophages of the mononuclear phagocyte system, mostly in the spleen, remove platelets. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 951 

 

Fetal hematopoiesis occurs in which structure? 

Gut 	c. Bone marrow 

Spleen 	d. Thymus 

ANS: B 

The spleen is the largest of the secondary lymphoid organs and the site of fetal hematopoiesis. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 951 

 

What is the consequence of a splenectomy? 

The level of iron in circulation increases. 

Antibody production increases to improve immune function. 

The number of defective cells in circulation increases. 

The number of clotting factors increases. 

ANS: C 

Splenic absence from any cause (e.g., atrophy, traumatic injury, removal because of disease) has several secondary effects on the body, among them an increase in morphologically defective blood cells in the circulation, confirming the spleen’s role in removing old or damaged cells. This description of the consequence of a splenectomy is not accurate for the other options. 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Pages 951-952 

 

During an infection, why do lymph nodes enlarge and become tender? 

B lymphocytes proliferate. 

The nodes are inflamed. 

The nodes fill with purulent exudate. 

The nodes are not properly functioning. 

ANS: A 

The B lymphocyte proliferation in response to significant antigen (e.g., during infection) may result in lymph node enlargement and tenderness (reactive lymph node). This description is not accurate for the other options. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 954 

 

Which blood cells are the chief phagocytes involved in the early inflammation process? 

Neutrophils 	c. Eosinophils 

Monocytes 	d. Erythrocytes 

ANS: A 

Neutrophils are the chief phagocytes of early inflammation. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 949 

Which blood cells are biconcave in shape and have the capacity to be reversibly deformed? 

Neutrophils 	c. Eosinophils 

Monocytes 	d. Erythrocytes 

ANS: D 

The erythrocyte’s size and shape are ideally suited to its function as a gas carrier. A red blood cell (RBC) is a small disk with two unique properties: (1) a biconcave shape and (2) the capacity to be reversibly deformed. These are characteristics not observed in any of the other options. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 948 

 

Which hemoglobin is made from oxidized ferric iron (Fe3+) and lacks the ability to bind oxygen? 

Deoxyhemoglobin 	c. Methemoglobin 

Oxyhemoglobin 	d. Glycosylated hemoglobin 

ANS: C 

Without reactivation by methemoglobin reductase, the Fe3+-containing hemoglobin (methemoglobin) cannot bind oxygen. This capability is not true of the other types of hemoglobin mentioned. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 961 

 

The absence of parietal cells would prevent the absorption of an essential nutrient necessary to prevent which type of anemia? 

Iron deficiency 	c.Folic acid deficiency anemia 

Pernicious anemia 	d. Aplastic anemia 

ANS: B 

Dietary vitamin B12 is a large molecule that requires a protein secreted by parietal cells into the stomach (intrinsic factor [IF]) to transport across the ileum. Defects in IF production lead to decreased B12 absorption and pernicious anemia. The other options are not the result of this process. 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 962 

 

Which nutrients are necessary for the synthesis of DNA and the maturation of erythrocytes? 

Protein and niacin 	c. Cobalamin (vitamin B12) and folate 

Iron and vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) 	d. Pantothenic acid and vitamin C 

ANS: C 

Cobalamin and folate are necessary for the synthesis of DNA and for the maturation of erythrocytes. The remaining options are not necessary for these processes to occur. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 962 | Table 27-6 

 

Which nutrients are necessary for hemoglobin synthesis? 

Protein and niacin 	c. Cobalamin (vitamin B12) and folate 

Iron and vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) 	d. Pantothenic acid and vitamin C 

ANS: B 

Iron and B6 (pyridoxine) are necessary for hemoglobin synthesis (see Table 27-6). The remaining options are not necessary for hemoglobin synthesis. 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 962 | Table 27-6 

 

Recycling of iron from erythrocytes is made possible by which of the following? 

Transferrin 	c. Apoferritin 

Hemosiderin 	d. Erythropoietin 

ANS: A 

Transferrin is recycled (transferrin cycle) in the following manner: (1) the transferrin-iron complex binds to a transferring receptor on the erythroblast’s plasma membrane; (2) the complex moves into the cell by receptor-mediated endocytosis; (3) iron is released (dissociated) from transferrin; and (4) the dissociated transferrin is returned to the bloodstream for reuse. The other options do not present an accurate description of the recycling of erythrocytic iron. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Pages 963-964 

 

By which structure are mature erythrocytes removed from the bloodstream? 

Liver 	c. Thymus 

Lymph nodes 	d. Spleen 

ANS: D 

After approximately 100 to 120 days in the circulation, old erythrocytes are removed by tissue macrophages, primarily in the spleen. 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 962 

 

Which substance is used to correct the chronic anemia associated with chronic renal failure? 

Iron 	c. Cobalamin (vitamin B12) 

Erythropoietin 	d. Folate 

ANS: B 

One of the most significant advances in the study of hematopoietic growth factors has been the development of erythropoietin for individuals with chronic renal failure. The other options are not associated with the treatment of chronic anemia. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Pages 960-961 

 

What is the role of thromboxane A (TXA2) in the secretion stage of hemostasis? 

Stimulates the synthesis of serotonin. 

Promotes vasodilation. 

Stimulates platelet aggregation. 

Promotes formation of cyclooxygenase. 

ANS: C 

Platelet aggregation is primarily stimulated by TXA2 and adenosine diphosphate (ADP), which induce functional fibrinogen receptors on the platelet. The other options do not present an accurate description of the role of thromboxane A. 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 969 

 

Which of the following is the role of nitric oxide (NO) in hemostasis? 

Stimulates the release of fibrinogen to maintain the platelet plug. 

Stimulates the release of clotting factors V and VII. 

Causes vasoconstriction and stimulates platelet aggregation. 

Controls platelet activation through cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)–mediated signaling. 

ANS: D 

Endothelial cell NO synthase produces NO, which controls platelet activation through cAMP-mediated signaling. The other options do not present an accurate description of the role of NO in hemostasis. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 966 | Figure 27-18 

 

The drug heparin acts in hemostasis by which processes? 

Inhibiting thrombin and antithrombin III (AT-III) 

Preventing the conversion of prothrombin to thrombin 

Shortening the fibrin strands to retract the blood clot 

Degrading the fibrin within blood clots 

ANS: A 

Clinically administered heparin or heparin sulfate (on the surface of endothelial cells) binds to AT-III and induces a conformational change that greatly enhances its activity. Under normal conditions, the presence of endothelial cell heparin sulfate and available AT-III in the circulation cooperateNUtoRpSrIoNtGeTctBt.hCeOvMessels from the effects of spontaneously activated thrombin. The other options do not accurately describe the role heparin plays in hemostasis. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 970 

 

What is plasmin’s role in the clotting process? 

Stimulates platelet aggregation. 

Inhibits platelet adhesion and aggregation. 

Prevents the conversion of prothrombin to degrade the fibrin within blood clots. 

Degrades the fibrin within blood clots. 

ANS: D 

Plasmin (also called fibrinase or fibrinolysin) is a serine protease that degrades fibrin polymers in clots. It is not capable of the functions described in the remaining options. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Pages 971-972 

 

What does polycythemia at birth indicate? 

Hypoxia in utero 	c. Congenitally absent spleen 

Dysfunctional bone marrow 	d. Dehydration in utero 

ANS: A 

The hypoxic intrauterine environment stimulates erythropoietin production in the fetus and accelerates fetal erythropoiesis, producing polycythemia (excessive proliferation of erythrocyte precursors) of the newborn. The other options are not related to polycythemia. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 975 

 

Where are Kupffer cells located? 

Kidneys 	c. Pancreas 

Liver 	d. Spleen 

ANS: B 

The liver macrophages are the only location for Kupffer cells. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 950 | Page 962 | Table 27-3 

 

Where are Langerhans cells found? 

Skin 	c. Kidney 

Intestinal lining 	d. Thyroid 

ANS: A 

Of the available options, only the skin is the location for Langerhans cells. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 950 | Table 27-3 

 

What is the role of collagen in the clotting process? 

Initiates the clotting cascade. 	c. Stimulates fibrin. 

Activates platelets. 	d. Deactivates fibrinogen. 

			ANS: B 	 

In the clotting process, collagen provides a particularly strong stimulus to activate platelets. Collagen does not bring about any of the other options. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 969 

 

Which form of iron (Fe) can be used in the formation of normal hemoglobin? 

Fe+ 	c. Fe3+ 

Fe2+ 	d.   Fe4+ 

ANS: B 

It is crucial that the iron be correctly charged; only reduced ferrous iron (Fe2+) can bind oxygen in the lungs and release it in the tissues. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 961 

 

Where are alveolar macrophages found? 

Skin 	c. Gastrointestinal tract 

Breasts 	d. Lungs 

ANS: D 

The lung is the only location for alveolar macrophages. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 950 | Table 27-3 

What changes to the hematologic system is related to age? 

Platelet adhesiveness decreases. 

Lymphocyte function decreases. 

Cellular immunity increases. 

Erythrocyte reproduction accelerates. 

ANS: B 

Blood composition changes little with age. A delay in erythrocyte replenishment may occur after bleeding, presumably because of iron deficiency. Lymphocyte function appears to decrease with age. Particularly affected is a decrease in cellular immunity. Platelet adhesiveness probably increases with age. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 975 

 

What is the function of erythrocytes? 

Tissue oxygenation 	c. Infection control 

Hemostasis 	d. Allergy response 

ANS: A 

Erythrocytes are solely responsible for tissue oxygenation. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Pages 947-948 

 

MULTIPLE RESPONSE 

 

Which characteristics allow erythrocytes to function as gas carriers? (Select all that apply.) a. Permanent shape 

Compactness 	 

Reversible deformability 

Presence of hyperactive mitochondria 

Biconcavity 

ANS: C, E 

A red blood cell (RBC) is a small disk with two unique properties: (1) a biconcave shape and (2) the capacity to be reversibly deformed. The other options are not relevant to the function of gas transport. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 948 

 

Which statements about plasma proteins are correct? (Select all that apply.) a. Provide clotting factors. 

Transport triglycerides. 

Synthesize complement proteins. 

Create hydrostatic pressure. 

Transport cholesterol. 

ANS: A, B, C, E 

Plasma proteins do not create hydrostatic pressure. The other options are all accurate statements regarding plasma proteins. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Pages 945-947 

What are the primary anticoagulant mechanisms? (Select all that apply.) a. Antithrombin III 

Tissue factor pathway inhibitor 

Hematopoiesis 

Protein C 

Phagocytosis 

ANS: A, B, D 

The major regulatory factors that control hemostasis reside where the greatest probability of clotting would occur—on the endothelial cell surface. The primary anticoagulant mechanisms include thrombin inhibitors (e.g., antithrombin III), tissue factor inhibitors (e.g., tissue factor pathway inhibitor), and mechanisms for degrading activated clotting factors (e.g., protein C). Hematopoiesis and phagocytosis are processes that are not related to anticoagulation. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 970 

 

Which statements are true regarding the role of the endothelium in clot formation? 

(Select all that apply.) 

The surface of the endothelium produces plasma protease inhibitors. 

Plasma protease inhibitors assist in preventing clot formation. 

Thrombomodulin is a protein that is converted on the surface of endothelial cells. 

Protein A binds to thrombomodulin. 

Activated protein C enhances the adhesion ability of neutrophils. 

ANS: A, B, C 

The surface of the endothelium produces plasma protease inhibitors to resist clot formation. Thrombomodulin is a mNUemRSbIrNaGneTBth.CroOmMbin-binding protein matter and is converted to activated protein C (see Figure 27-18) on the surface of endothelial cells. Protein C in the circulation binds to thrombomodulin. Activated protein C inhibits the adhesion of neutrophils to the endothelium. 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Pages 970-971 

 

Which statements characterize albumin? (Select all that apply.) 

Retains sodium to maintain water balance. 

Provides colloid osmotic pressure. 

Is synthesized in the liver. 

Is a carrier for drugs that have low water solubility. 

Is a small molecule 

ANS: B, C, D 

Albumin is a plasma protein produced by the liver. It serves as a carrier molecule for the normal components of blood, as well as for drugs that have low solubility in water (e.g., free fatty acids, lipid-soluble hormones, thyroid hormones, bile salts). Albumin molecules are large and do not diffuse freely through the vascular endothelium, thus they maintain the critical colloidal osmotic pressure (or oncotic pressure) that regulates the passage of water and solutes into the surrounding tissues (see Chapters 1 and 3). 

 

			PTS:   1 	REF: Page 946 

MATCHING 

 

Match the descriptions with the corresponding terms. 

Clotting 

Red blood cell development 

Red blood cell destruction 

Platelet formation 

Blood cell production 

Endomitosis 

Hemostasis 

Hematopoiesis 

Erythropoiesis 

Phagocytosis 

 

ANS: D 	PTS:   1 	REF: Page 965 

MSC: During thrombopoiesis, the megakaryocyte progenitor is programmed to undergo an endomitotic cell cycle called endomitosis, during which DNA replication of platelets occurs. 

ANS: A 	PTS:   1 	REF: Page 965 

MSC: Hemostasis is defined as arrest of bleeding. 

ANS: E 	PTS:   1 	REF: Page 954 

MSC: Blood cell production (hematopoiesis) is ongoing, occurring in the liver and spleen of the fetus and only in bone marrow (medullary hematopoiesis) after birth. 

ANS: B 	PTS:   1 	REF: Page 959 

MSC: It was not until the 1850s that the bone marrow was identified as the site of erythropoiesis, or the development of red blood cells. 

ANS: C 	PTS:   1 	REF: Page 950 

 

MSC: Monocytes and macrophages ar e a c t iv e p h a g oc ytes that participate in the immune and inflammatory responses. They also ingest dead or defective host cells, particularly blood cells.